# How to use this book

This book is, and we hope always will be, a work in progress. It is intended for people who
plan, deploy, maintain and operate computer networks using Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6).
It is being written and updated by exactly such people. IPv6 is a mature protocol but every day
we gain more experience, products are updated, and quite often the underlying technical
standards are updated too. Therefore, this book will likewise be constantly updated. It's issued
under an [open source license](https://github.com/becarpenter/book6/blob/main/LICENSE.md).
You are welcome to obtain a printed copy at cost price, but be aware that the book will evolve constantly.

The [list of contents](https://github.com/becarpenter/book6/blob/main/Contents.md)
should act as an on-line guide to the topics covered.
Most readers will probably not read from cover to cover. Design your own path through
the book. 

# How a user sees IPv6

The answer should be: *they don't*. In an ideal world, users would never
need to be aware of the lower layers of the protocol stack, and they certainly
should never have to see a hexadecimal number, or even be aware that they are using IPv6.
The goal of a network designer or operator should be to make this true.

However, it's unlikely that this will always succeed. It's likely that if a
user ever does see something specific to IPv6, it's probably at the worst possible
time: when there is a fault or a system configuration issue. That is exactly
when the user is either reading on-line help information, or in contact
with a help desk. It is therefore recommended to review any documentation
you provide to users or to help desk staff to make sure that when IPv6 is
mentioned, the information is complete, correct and up to date. It's also
important that configuration tools are designed to avoid or minimize any
need for users to enter IPv6 addresses by hand.

# How an application programmer sees IPv6

In a very theoretical world, an application programmer could rely on
a DNS lookup to return the best (and only) address of a remote host,
and could then pass that address directly to the network socket
interface without further ado. Unfortunately the real world is not
that simple. Even without considering the version number, there are
several types of IP address, and a DNS lookup may return a variety
of addresses. In most cases, applications will use the function
get_address_info() and get back a list of valid addresses. Which is
the best one to use, and should the program try more than one?

We do not go into this subject in detail, because this book is
not aimed primarily at application programmers. However, operators
need to be aware that the default behavior of most applications
is simply to use the *first* address returned by get_address_info().
Some applications (such as web browsers) may use a smarter approach
known as "happy eyeballs" by means of a heuristic to detect which
address gives the fastest response. However, operators need to
understand the various address types in order to configure
systems optimally, including the get_address_info() precedence
table in every host.

This topic is discussed further in [tbd](tbd). 

# How a network operations center sees IPv6

This is really the topic of this entire book. In the long term,
we expect that "running an IPv6 network" will be synonymous with
"running a network". IPv6 should not be viewed as an add-on,
but as the primary network protocol. How it coexists and
interacts with IPv4 is the subject of [Chapter 3](TBD). This
section gives an overview of how IPv6 looks when viewed from
the NOC, and the rest of the book covers the details.

Much more, to be drafted by someone who actually runs a NOC...

# How to keep up to date

The intention is for this book to be kept up to date by
its user community. However, for the very latest information
on IPv6 operational best practices and protocol details,
readers may wish to track the discussions in the relevant
IETF working groups, in particular
[IPv6 Operations (v6ops)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/v6ops/about/)
and
[IPv6 Maintenance (6man)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6man/about/).
These groups are open to all, although following the discussion can
be quite time-consuming.

The final results of these working groups are published as Internet
Request for Comments documents (RFCs), freely available from
the [RFC Editor](https://www.rfc-editor.org/). *Warning:* obsolete
RFCs are never modified or deleted. It is essential to look at
the current status of an RFC before trusting it. For example,
the current status of the 2017 version of the main IPv6 standard is shown
at [this info page](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200).

This book intends to cite the latest version of all the RFCs it
mentions, but it never hurts to check the info page.

# How to contribute

If you find an error or a gap in this book, or a recommendation
that you disagree with on the basis of practical experience, you
are most welcome either to raise an issue, or even better to
draft updated or new text. We are maintaining this book using
GitHub - see the [book6 repository](https://github.com/becarpenter/book6)
for details.

You can raise issues through
the book's [issue tracker](https://github.com/becarpenter/book6/issues).
To become an active contributor
[check the conditions](https://github.com/becarpenter/book6/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).
Your contributions will be reviewed by an editorial team.