# 10. Obsolete Features in IPv6

This chapter lists a number of IPv6 features that can be considered
obsolete or unused, even if in some cases the relevant RFCs have not
been formally obsoleted. Readers are advised to ignore these techniques
for new deployments, and to consider removing them from existing
deployments.

## Mobile IPv6
Mobile IPv6 was a technology that was baked into the IPv6 protocol very early in its development. However based on zero implementations the technology exists only in textbooks and IETF standards. Since there are no current implementations and current standards are extremely stale, Mobile IPv6 is effectvy obsolete and should not be taught in training or mentioned as part of the IPv6 feature set. Below are a listing of those IETF standards:

* [RFC 6275](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6275) - Mobility Support in IPv6 was last updated in 2011. It is the primary standard that covers basic operation, security functions, mobility operations, and packet structure.
* [RFC 4283](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4283) - Mobile Node Identifier Option for Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) was last updated in 2005. It primarily covers all the functions of the Mobility Header and it was essential to have a mechanism wherein mobility entities can be identified using other identifiers.
* [RFC 4285](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4285) - Authentication Protocol for Mobile IPv6 was last updated in 2006. This was the solution for securing the Binding Update and Binding Acknowledgment messages between the Mobile Node and Home Agent using a mobility message authentication option that is included in these messages

## Site-Local Addressing
Site-Local addressing has an odd place in IPv6. Is was orginally proposed to answer the private IPv6 addressing concern similar to [RFC 1918](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1918). Site-local addressing was orginally defined for its special use in section 2.5.6 of [RFC 3513](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3513#section-2.5.6). Problems arose with their special use based on the following reasons:
* ambiguity of addresses meaning an address such as FEC0::1 can be present in multiple sites, and the address itself does not contain any indication of the site to which it   belongs.  This creates pain for developers of applications, for the designers of routers and for the network managers.  
* fuzzy definition of sites because the ambiguity of addressing they can exist accross sites which then creates the requirement to add things like zone identifiers to ID the actual sites. For example, FEC0::1234:5678:9ABC%1 for a multihomed node. This management of identifiers has proven hard to understand by developers, and also hard to execute by those developers who understand the concept.

### Deprecated but Not Gone
These addresses weren't deprecated until [RFC 3879](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3879) about a year later. However, even with this deprecation, things remain in standards that have caused significant confusion. Since [RFC 4291](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291#section-2.5.7) talked to this deprecation, it still exists as an item in RFC 4291. 
* The requirement in RFC 3879 also states that the prefix fec0::/10 "MUST NOT be reassigned for other use except by a future IETF standards action." Given that, it can't be reabsorbed into the IANA Global Unicast address space.
* It is also listed as a seperate label in the IPv6 Prefix Policy Table outlined in [RFC 6724](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6724) as 11 with a precendence of 1.
* RFC 3879 also states that "Existing implementations and deployments MAY continue to use this prefix"

All of this adds to confusion for the usage and supportability of Site Local Addressing. Site Local Addressing is effectvy obsolete and should not be taught in training or mentioned as part of the IPv6 feature set.



## Secure Neighbor Discovery (SeND)

Older IPv4/IPv6 coexistence mechanisms are described in
[3. Obsolete techniques](../3.%20Coexistence%20with%20Legacy%20IPv4/Obsolete%20techniques.md).

<!-- ## Name (add plain section names like that) -->

<!-- Link lines generated automatically; do not delete -->

### [<ins>Back to main Contents</ins>](../Contents.md)
