# Security

Security has ever-growing importance in general and the IP protocol has
been a big area for security research and development. The majority of
IPv4 practices remain applicable to IPv6. Exceptions exist for aspects
of the first hop and for extension headers that are significantly
different in IPv6. Distributed address acquisition (SLAAC,
[2. Auto-configuration](../2.%20IPv6%20Basic%20Technology/Auto-configuration.md))
creates its own additional security challenges. Multiple addresses per
host improve privacy, but not without complications. Extension headers
give IPv6 great flexibility and extensibility that may be abused,
leading to additional security precautions.

Initially, it was expected that end-to-end cryptography (encryption and
authentication) would be a mandatory part of IPv6 (IPsec,
[RFC4301](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4301) and SEND,
[RFC3971](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3971)). This proved
unrealistic, so cryptography has been accepted as optional at the
networking layer, exactly as it is for IPv4. At the same time,
cryptography has become widespread at the transport or application
layers.

IPv6 aims at restoring end-to-end connectivity to the networking layer.
Therefore, IPv6 security in no way relies on the presence of network
address translation. IPv6 has no standardized NAT66 and even network
prefix translation (NPTv6,
[RFC6296](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6296)) is little used. NAT
or NPTv6 provide at best weak security protection at the network
boundary, so this is not seen as a defect. The normal approach to
boundary security for IPv6 is a firewall; most firewall products support
IPv6 as well as IPv4. Topology hiding is addressed in a later section of
this chapter.

Today, the “Zero-trust” approach in security tends to move the stress
from perimeter protection to the authentication and encryption for all
traffic (including internal for any perimeter). If this approach
succeeds, some enterprises may choose to reduce the role of firewalls in
future. IPv6 is well positioned for this change.

There is a good overview of IPv6 security in
[RFC9099](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9099). This is a good
repository of references to many documents on various IPv6 security
aspects.

<!-- ## Name (add plain section names like that) -->

<!-- Link lines generated automatically; do not delete -->

## [Layer 2 considerations](Layer%202%20considerations.md)

## [Filtering](Filtering.md)

## [Topology obfuscation](Topology%20obfuscation.md)

### [<ins>Back to main Contents</ins>](../Contents.md)
